---
l1idx: 2
l2idx: 1
l3idx: 2
l4idx: 1
l5idx: 1
l5name: "Abstraction Defined"
permalink: 2_1_2_1_1.html
summary: "Abstraction is a powerful concept.  It's foundational to information technology and (not coincidentally) pretty much all of human knowledge.  But, what does all that *mean*?."
---
## Common Usage

In short, abstraction is a powerful tool for organizing and managing our knowledge of complex systems. There's no shortage of definitions for abstraction in various dictionaries (and for various technical domains), but I think that the most generalized version would be something like this:

<details markdown=block>
<summary markdown=span>"Abstraction" ("to abstract") (as a verb)</summary>
1. To summarize. As in: "I will abstract the novel War and Peace into a five-page outline."

2. To collectively represent a group a things (objects or concepts) in which the grouping occurs through the application of a filter that selects group-members based on some specific characteristic/property of those things.  As in: " 'Stampede' *abstracts* a group of bovines, each of which are running full-speed in the same direction and are in immediate physical proximity to each other."

</details>

<details markdown=block>
<summary markdown=span>"An abstraction" (as a noun)</summary>
1. A summary.  As in: "Your abstraction of War and Peace into a five-page ouline was a deeply silly undertaking."

2. A group-noun, used to refer to a group of things that have been *abstracted* (in the sense of the second verb definition above.)  As in: " The abstraction 'stampede" refers directly to the bovines described in the second verb definition above.)

3. The concept (selection filter) used in the second verb-definition above.  As in:  " The abstraction 'stampede' *is the filtering-concept*:  bovines running at full speed in the same direction and immediate physical proximity with each other."

</details>

When using the word "abstraction", it is important to disambiguate these various meanings.  If I'm trying to refer to a set of selection-criteria, and you think I'm referring to an actual group of dusty-hooved buffalo, our discourse will be severely stunted.

## For Our Purposes in This Book

TBD.