---
l1idx: 2
l2idx: 1
l3idx: 2
l4idx: 1
l5idx: 2
l5name: "Abstraction In Use"
permalink: 2_1_2_1_2.html
summary: "Abstraction is a powerful concept.  It's foundational to information technology and (not coincidentally) pretty much all of human knowledge.  Let's figure out what that actually means."
---
## Abstraction in action

Picture a microsope slide, prepared with a drop of water containing hundreds of amoeba and sugar crystals. Now, imagine that your miscrocope can zoom all the way down to subatomic scale.

If have the microscope set the sub-atomic scale, you'll see an innumberable number of electrons/protons/neutrons, but at that scale you might just barely be able to infer the existence of an atomic structure.
<details markdown=block>
<summary markdown=span>""1st Absraction:  Atoms" (as a noun)</summary>
If you zoom out ("atomic scale"), you won't see electrons/protons/etc any more; you'll see individual atoms, and you'll notice that there seems to be some sort of pattern to how they connect/interact with each other. That "zooming out" has effectively "abstracted" subatomic particles into atoms. It's a *useful* abstraction because (with the benefit of a few hundred years of scientific research at your disposal) you can *predict* the behavior of the atoms without needing direct knowledge of the individual subatomic particles that they are made up of. But, if you want to *explain* (understand) the *mechanism* of that interaction, you have to drill back down to the subatomic level to see things like the "sharing" of electrons in covalent bonding.
</details>
<details markdown=block>
<summary markdown=span>""2nd Absraction: Molecules" (as a noun)</summary>
Zooming out again (to "molecular scale") you'll see a bewildering array of molecules. You've "abstracted" atoms into molecules. Again, it's a *useful* abstraction because you are able to infer (or borrow from the collected body of existing human knowledge) a set of patterns that let you predict how the molecules interact with each other.
</details>
<details markdown=block>
<summary markdown=span>""3rd Abstraction: Organelles" (as a noun)</summary>
Zoom out again, (to the "organelle scale") and now you'll see all these neat structures like mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, and others.
</details>

In these examples, the "zoom level" of the microscope is serving as our organizing filter in the process of abstraction. Zooming in to "subatomics scale" makes organelles and molecules invisible to us, for example.

For a more on-topic example, "good luck" to anyone hoping to understand why a right-click their desktop won't raise a context menu if they are zoomed in and watching machine-code instructions get executed by your CPU.

The real *power* of abstraction though isn't just that it gives us a handy label for referring to groups of things.

## The Power of Abstraction

In the previous paragraph, I talked about trying to figure out why you couldn't get a context menu on your desktop, and using just a list  machine-code instructions being executed on your CPU to make your diagnosis.  That's is a good lever for prying open the lid of the jar labeled "how abstraction *helps*."

A particularly good/useful/well-formed abstraction does *more* than just provide a convenient "handle" for grouping things (physical and/or conceptual) together.  A *useful* abstraction has the benefit of "shielding" us from the (potentially overwhelming level of) detail(s) associated with the absrtaction's constituent elements, and enables/encourages us to interact with the emergent properties or "epiphenomena" of the abstraction.

By way of example, dolphins probably have very little use for the details of the behavior of a single fish, but they benefit greatly from being able to predict the aggregate behavior of a *school* of fish (which they regularly herd to feed on.)  The behavior of a school of fish (or flock of birds, etc..) could be deduced from the patterns in the behavior of the individual fish (or sparrows, etc...), but doing so would require a tremendous amount of modeling and inference and overall mental effort.  The emergent properties of the school (or flock) of animals though are readily apparent if we "zoom out" and regard the aggregate/abstraction as its own entity.


It gives us access to a set of observable phenomena that we wouldn't have (remotely feasible) access to otherwise.
