---
l1idx: 2
l2idx: 1
l3idx: 2
l4idx: 1
l5idx: 3
l5name: "Why Abstraction Matters"
permalink: 2_1_2_1_3.html
summary: "Now that we have a shared understanding of what abstraction is, and have seen what it looks like, we'll talk about why it's so important in the first place."
---
## Utility in Simplicity

In the previous page, I talked about trying to figure out why you couldn't get a context menu on your desktop, and using just a list  machine-code instructions being executed on your CPU to make your diagnosis.  That's is a good lever for prying open the lid of an imaginary jar labeled "how abstraction *helps*."

A particularly good/useful/well-formed abstraction does *more* than just provide a convenient "handle" for grouping things (physical and/or conceptual) together. For example:  "*Things on my desk that aren't purple*" is a *valid* abstraction of "things on my desk", but not (for me anyway) a particularly *useful* one.

One way an abstraction can be *useful* is in "shielding" us from the (potentially overwhelming level of) detail(s) associated with the abstraction's constituent elements.  Doing so enables/encourages us to interact with the emergent properties or "epiphenomena" of the abstraction.

By way of example, dolphins probably have very little use for the details of the behavior of a single fish, but they benefit greatly from being able to predict the aggregate behavior of a *school* of fish (which they regularly herd to feed on.)  The behavior of a school of fish (or flock of birds, etc..) *could* be deduced from the patterns in the behavior of the individual fish (or sparrows, etc...), but doing so would require a tremendous amount of modeling and inference and overall mental/computational effort.  The emergent/epiphenomenal properties of the school (or flock) of animals though, are readily apparent if we "zoom out" and regard the aggregate/abstraction as its own entity.

By obfuscating the lower-layer/abstracted-items, the abstraction allows/encourages us access to a set of observable phenomena that we wouldn't have (remotely feasible) access to otherwise.

## Cross-domain Applicability

TBD.
